.\" $Id: netatalk.conf.5,v 1.1 2000-09-20 19:24:22 rufustfirefly Exp $
.TH NETATALK.CONF 5 "18 September 2000" "netatalk 1.5"
.UC 4
.SH NAME
netatalk.conf \- Configuration file used by \fBafpd\fR(8),
\fBpapd\fR(8) and \fBatalkd\fR(8) as part of netatalk.

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB/etc/atalk/netatalk.conf\fR is the main configuration file for netatalk.
It consists of a series of bash-style assignments. The possible variables
and their meanings are:

.TP
.B ATALK_NAME
This is the machines' Appletalk name. Note that spaces in this name may cause
problems due to passing in the shell scripts. The default value of
\fB`echo ${HOSTNAME}|cut -d. -f1`\fR produces a name based on the host name
of the machine (example: \fBmybox.foo.com\fR becomes \fBmybox\fR).

.TP
.B ATALK_ZONE
The Appletalk "zone" that the server should be visible in, preceded with
the "@" (example: \fBATALK_ZONE=@Donuts\fR). If omitted, it will automatically
detect the current zone.

.TP
.B AFPD_GUEST
This is the user account that guest runs as. The default should be set to 
\fBnobody\fR or another unpriviledged account on the system.

.TP
.B AFPD_MAX_CLIENTS
This should be set to the maximum number of clients you want to be able to
connect to the \fBafpd\fR daemon concurrently. If you are having problems
with connections being refused during high load, you should probably increase
this number (example: \fBAFPD_MAX_CLIENTS=50\fR).

.TP
.B AFPD_UAMLIST
AFPD_UAMLIST contains the list of the UAMs that should be forced to be
loaded, prefixed by a "-U", delimited by commas 
(example: \fBAFPD_UAMLIST="-U uams_guest.so,uams_randnum.so"\fR would load
the Randnum and Guest authentication modules). If this is omitted, the
default modules will load.

.TP
.B ATALK_BGROUND
This controls whether the daemons are started in the background or in the
foreground. It is recommended that the daemons be started in the foreground
so that any dependent programs will load properly. The options are \fByes\fR
and \fBno\fR (example: \fBATALK_BGROUND=no\fR).

.TP
.B ATALKD_RUN
\fBatalkd\fR is the master Appletalk daemon. This should always be set to
\fBon\fR. The options are \fByes\fR and \fBno\fR.

.TP
.B AFPD_RUN
\fBafpd\fR is the Appletalk file server daemon. This should be enabled if you
are planning on using netatalk to serve files over Appletalk. The options are
\fByes\fR and \fBno\fR.

.TP
.B PAPD_RUN
\fBpapd\fR is the Appletalk printing daemon. This should be enabled if you
wish to serve printers using Appletalk. The options are \fByes\fR and \fBno\fR.

.P
The options in this file control the behavior of the init script(s) for
netatalk, which vary by distribution.

.SH SEE ALSO
afpd(8), atalkd(8), papd(8)
