# Name

atalkd â€” userland AppleTalk network manager daemon

# Synopsis

`atalkd [-f configfile] [-P pidfile] [-1] [-2] [-d] [-t]`

`atalkd [ -v | -V ]`

# Description

`atalkd` is responsible for all user level AppleTalk network management.
This includes routing, name registration and lookup, zone lookup, and
the AppleTalk Echo Protocol (similar to `ping(8)`). Specifically, this
corresponds to the RTMP, NBP, ZIP, and AEP protocols in the AppleTalk
protocol family.

The init system of your OS will typically start the `atalkd` daemon at
bootup. The daemon first reads from its configuration file,
`atalkd.conf`. If there is no configuration file, or if no interfaces
have been defined, `atalkd` will attempt to configure all available
interfaces and will create a configuration file. See `atalkd.conf(5)`
for details on the configuration file format.

# Options

-1

> Forces AppleTalk Phase 1.

-2

> Forces AppleTalk Phase 2.

-d

> Do not disassociate daemon from terminal. Writes some additional
debugging information to stdout.

-f <configfile\>

> Consult <configfile\> instead of `atalkd.conf` for the configuration
information.

-P <pidfile\>

> Specifies the file in which `atalkd` stores its process id.

-t

> Turns on transition routing.

-v | -V

> Print version information and exit.

# Routing

If you are connecting an `atalkd` router to an existing AppleTalk
network, you should first contact your local network administrators to
obtain appropriate network addresses.

`atalkd` can provide routing between interfaces by configuring multiple
interfaces. Each interface must be assigned a unique
net-range between 1 and 65279 (0 and
65535 are illegal, and addresses between 65280 and 65534 are reserved
for startup). It is best to choose the smallest useful net-range, i.e.
if you have three machines on a LAN, choose a net-range below 1000. Each
net-range may have an arbitrary list of zones associated with it.

Note that `atalkd` automatically acts as a router if there is more than
one interface, and no other configurations are present.

# Files

`atalkd.conf` configuration file

# See Also

`atalkd.conf(5)`

# Author

[Contributors to the Netatalk Project](https://netatalk.io/contributors)
