DOCKER.md, before:

# Docker

Netatalk comes with a Dockerfile and entry point script for running a containerized AFP server and AppleTalk services.

Out of the box, exactly two users, and two shared volumes are supported in this container. One of the shared volumes is a Time Machine backup volume by default. If you need a different setup, please use the manual configuration option.

Make sure you have Docker Engine installed, then build the netatalk container:

```
docker build -t netatalk:latest .
```

Alternatively, pull a pre-built Docker image from [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/u/netatalk).

## How to Run

Once you have the netatalk image on your machine with Docker Engine, run it with `docker run` or `docker compose`.
When running, expose either port 548 for AFP, or use the `host` network driver.
The former option is more secure, but you will have to manually specify the IP address in the client when connecting to the file server.

It is recommended to set up either a bind mount, or a Docker managed volume for persistent storage.
Without this, the shared volume be stored in volatile storage that is lost upon container shutdown.

For Docker Compose, you can use the sample [docker-compose.yml](https://github.com/Netatalk/netatalk/blob/main/docker-compose.yml) file that is distributed with this source code.

Below follows a sample `docker run` command. Substitute `/path/to/share` with an actual path on your file system with appropriate permissions, `AFP_USER` and `AFP_PASS` with the appropriate user and password, and `ATALKD_INTERFACE` with the network interface to use for AppleTalk.

You also need to set the timezone with `TZ` to the [IANA time zone ID](https://nodatime.org/TimeZones) for your location, in order to get the correct time synchronized with the Timelord time server.

```
docker run --rm \
  --network host \
  --cap-add=NET_ADMIN \
  --volume "/path/to/share:/mnt/afpshare" \
  --volume "/path/to/backup:/mnt/afpbackup" \
  --volume "/var/run/dbus:/var/run/dbus" \
  --env AFP_USER= \
  --env AFP_PASS= \
  --env AFP_GROUP=afpusers \
  --env ATALKD_INTERFACE= \
  --env TZ= \
  --name netatalk netatalk:latest
```

## Constraints

In order to use Zeroconf service discovery as well as the AppleTalk transport layer, the `host` network driver and `NET_ADMIN` capabilities are mandatory.

Additionally, we rely on the host's DBUS for Zeroconf, achieved with a bind mount such as `/var/run/dbus:/var/run/dbus`. The left hand side of the bind mount is the host machine, and the right hand side is the container. The host machine path may have to be changed to match the location of DBUS on the host machine.

On certain host OSes, notably Ubuntu: if the Apparmor security policy restricts D-Bus messages, enable the `unconfined` security option. See the [Docker AppArmor security profiles documentation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/apparmor/) for further details.

The container is hard coded to output `afpd` (the Netatalk file server daemon) logs to the container's stdout, with default log level `info`. Logs from the AppleTalk daemons are sent to the syslog.

## Printing

The CUPS administrative web app is running on port 631 in the container, which is exposed to the host machine by default when using the `host` network driver. This is used to configure CUPS compatible printers for printing from an old Mac or Apple IIGS.

You may have to restart papd (or the entire container) after adding a CUPS printer for it to be picked up as an AppleTalk printer.

## Environment Variables

### Mandatory

These are required to set the credentials used to authenticate with the file server.

| Variable | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `AFP_USER` | Primary user of the shared volumes |
| `AFP_PASS` | Password to authenticate with the primary user |
| `AFP_GROUP` | Group that owns the shared volume dirs |

### Mandatory for AppleTalk

| Variable | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `ATALKD_INTERFACE` | The network interface to use for AppleTalk |
| `TZ` | The timezone to use for the container; must be a [IANA time zone ID](https://nodatime.org/TimeZones) |

### Optional

| Variable        | Description                                                    |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `AFP_UID`       | Specify user id of `AFP_USER`                                  |
| `AFP_GID`       | Specify group id of `AFP_GROUP`                                |
| `AFP_USER2`     | Username for the secondary user                                |
| `AFP_PASS2`     | Password for the secondary user                                |
| `SERVER_NAME`   | The name of the server reported to Zeroconf                    |
| `SHARE_NAME`    | The name of the primary shared volume                          |
| `SHARE2_NAME`   | The name of the secondary shared (Time Machine) volume         |
| `AFP_LOGLEVEL`  | The verbosity of logs; default is "info"                       |
| `INSECURE_AUTH` | When non-zero, enable the "ClearTxt" and "Guest" UAMs          |
| `DISABLE_TIMEMACHINE` | When non-zero, the secondary shared volume is a regular volume |
| `MANUAL_CONFIG` | When non-zero, enable manual management of config files        |

Commit message:

Update DOCKER.md with concrete apparmor config example

DOCKER.md, after:

# Docker

Netatalk comes with a Dockerfile and entry point script for running a containerized AFP server and AppleTalk services.

Out of the box, exactly two users, and two shared volumes are supported in this container. One of the shared volumes is a Time Machine backup volume by default. If you need a different setup, please use the manual configuration option.

Make sure you have Docker Engine installed, then build the netatalk container:

```
docker build -t netatalk:latest .
```

Alternatively, pull a pre-built Docker image from [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/u/netatalk).

## How to Run

Once you have the netatalk image on your machine with Docker Engine, run it with `docker run` or `docker compose`.
When running, expose either port 548 for AFP, or use the `host` network driver.
The former option is more secure, but you will have to manually specify the IP address in the client when connecting to the file server.

It is recommended to set up either a bind mount, or a Docker managed volume for persistent storage.
Without this, the shared volume be stored in volatile storage that is lost upon container shutdown.

For Docker Compose, you can use the sample [docker-compose.yml](https://github.com/Netatalk/netatalk/blob/main/docker-compose.yml) file that is distributed with this source code.

Below follows a sample `docker run` command. Substitute `/path/to/share` with an actual path on your file system with appropriate permissions, `AFP_USER` and `AFP_PASS` with the appropriate user and password, and `ATALKD_INTERFACE` with the network interface to use for AppleTalk.

You also need to set the timezone with `TZ` to the [IANA time zone ID](https://nodatime.org/TimeZones) for your location, in order to get the correct time synchronized with the Timelord time server.

```
docker run --rm \
  --network host \
  --cap-add=NET_ADMIN \
  --volume "/path/to/share:/mnt/afpshare" \
  --volume "/path/to/backup:/mnt/afpbackup" \
  --volume "/var/run/dbus:/var/run/dbus" \
  --env AFP_USER= \
  --env AFP_PASS= \
  --env AFP_GROUP=afpusers \
  --env ATALKD_INTERFACE= \
  --env TZ= \
  --name netatalk netatalk:latest
```

## Constraints

In order to use Zeroconf service discovery as well as the AppleTalk transport layer, the `host` network driver and `NET_ADMIN` capabilities are mandatory.

Additionally, we rely on the host's DBUS for Zeroconf, achieved with a bind mount such as `/var/run/dbus:/var/run/dbus`. The left hand side of the bind mount is the host machine, and the right hand side is the container. The host machine path may have to be changed to match the location of DBUS on the host machine.

On certain host OSes, notably Ubuntu: if the Apparmor security policy restricts D-Bus messages, enable the `unconfined` security option.

Example for the docker compose yaml configuration file:

```
    security_opt:
      - apparmor=unconfined
```

See the [Docker AppArmor security profiles documentation](https://docs.docker.com/engine/security/apparmor/) for further details.

The container is hard coded to output `afpd` (the Netatalk file server daemon) logs to the container's stdout, with default log level `info`. Logs from the AppleTalk daemons are sent to the syslog.

## Printing

The CUPS administrative web app is running on port 631 in the container, which is exposed to the host machine by default when using the `host` network driver. This is used to configure CUPS compatible printers for printing from an old Mac or Apple IIGS.

You may have to restart papd (or the entire container) after adding a CUPS printer for it to be picked up as an AppleTalk printer.

## Environment Variables

### Mandatory

These are required to set the credentials used to authenticate with the file server.

| Variable | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `AFP_USER` | Primary user of the shared volumes |
| `AFP_PASS` | Password to authenticate with the primary user |
| `AFP_GROUP` | Group that owns the shared volume dirs |

### Mandatory for AppleTalk

| Variable | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `ATALKD_INTERFACE` | The network interface to use for AppleTalk |
| `TZ` | The timezone to use for the container; must be a [IANA time zone ID](https://nodatime.org/TimeZones) |

### Optional

| Variable        | Description                                                    |
|-----------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `AFP_UID`       | Specify user id of `AFP_USER`                                  |
| `AFP_GID`       | Specify group id of `AFP_GROUP`                                |
| `AFP_USER2`     | Username for the secondary user                                |
| `AFP_PASS2`     | Password for the secondary user                                |
| `SERVER_NAME`   | The name of the server reported to Zeroconf                    |
| `SHARE_NAME`    | The name of the primary shared volume                          |
| `SHARE2_NAME`   | The name of the secondary shared (Time Machine) volume         |
| `AFP_LOGLEVEL`  | The verbosity of logs; default is "info"                       |
| `INSECURE_AUTH` | When non-zero, enable the "ClearTxt" and "Guest" UAMs          |
| `DISABLE_TIMEMACHINE` | When non-zero, the secondary shared volume is a regular volume |
| `MANUAL_CONFIG` | When non-zero, enable manual management of config files        |
