.TH acleandir 1 "26 Feb 1998" 2.0.0 Netatalk 
.SH NAME
acleandir \- clean up a directory containing netatalk Apple Macintosh files
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBacleandir\fR [\-rnvi] \fBdirname\fR 
.sp 1
.SH DESCRIPTION
acleandir cleans up the directory \fIdirname.\fR By default it simply removes
"orphan" AppleDouble files, i.e. those which do not have a
corresponding data file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
\fB\-d\fR
Also remove the .AppleDouble directory if it contains no
AppleDouble files after "orphan" removal. This will result
in the finder location of \fIdirname\fR
within its parent being lost.
.TP 
\fB\-r\fR, \fB\-R\fR
Recursive. Clean up directories recursively.
.TP 
\fB\-n\fR
Display the filenames of "orphans" but don't
remove any. Display size if "orphan" appears to contain a
resource fork.
.TP 
\fB\-i\fR
Interactive. Prompt for confirmation before a removal. A y in
answer confirms that the removal should proceed.
.TP 
\fB\-v\fR
Verbose. Display the names of all "orphans" and
\&.AppleDouble directories removed. Reports the size if the
"orphan" appears to contain a resource fork.
.TP 
\fB\-a\fR
Aggressive. Remove all AppleDouble files, not just
"orphans". Also remove the .AppleDesktop directory if
present. Impies \fB\-d\fR option. Use with caution as the
Macintosh type/creator and finder location of all files will be lost
and the content of some documents, such as Symantec Projects, will
be destroyed.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
returns exit status 0 unless bad options are provided or a directory
is not given on the command line.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBafile\fR(1),
\fBafpd\fR(8)

