.TH afppasswd 1 "22 Aug 2004" 2.0.0 Netatalk 
.SH NAME
afppasswd \- netatalk password maintenance utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBafppasswd\fR [\-acfn] [ \-p
\fBpasswd\fR \fBfile\fR ] [ \-u
\fBminimum\fR \fBuid\fR ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
afppasswd allows the maintenance of afppasswd
files created by netatalk for use by the uams_randnum.so UAM (providing
the "Randnum exchange" and "2\-Way Randnum exchange" User Authentication
Modules).
.PP
afppasswd can either be called by root with
parameters, or can be called by local system users with no parameters to
change their AFP passwords.
.RS 
\fBNote\fR
.PP
With this utility you can only change the passwords used by two
specific UAMs. As they provide only weak password encryption, the use of
the "Randnum exchange" and "2\-Way Randnum exchange" UAMs is deprecated
unless one has to support very old AFP clients, that can not deal with
the more secure "DHCAST128" UAM instead. Please compare with the [Cross reference to non\-existant ID \(lqauthentication\(rq] inside Netatalk's
documentation.
.RE
.SH EXAMPLE
Local user changing their own password:
.PP
.nf
example% \fBafppasswd\fR
Enter NEW AFP password: \fB(hidden)\fR
Enter NEW AFP password again: \fB(hidden)\fR
afppasswd: updated password.
.fi
.SH OPTIONS
.TP 
\fB\-a\fR
Add a new user to the afppasswd
file.
.TP 
\fB\-c\fR
Create and/or initialize afppasswd file or
specific user.
.TP 
\fB\-f\fR
Force the current action.
.TP 
\fB\-p\fR\fI path\fR
Path to afppasswd file.
.TP 
\fB\-n\fR
If cracklib support is built into \fInetatalk\fR this option will cause cracklib
checking to be disabled, if the superuser does not want to have the
password run against the cracklib dictionary.
.TP 
\fB\-u\fR\fI minimum uid\fR
This is the minimum \fIuser id\fR
(uid) that afppasswd will use when creating
users.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBafpd\fR(8), \fBatalkd\fR(8).

