.TH megatron 1 "8 Jan 1992" 2.0.0 Netatalk 
.SH NAME
megatron, unhex, unbin, unsingle, hqx2bin, single2bin, macbinary \- Macintosh file format transformer
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmegatron\fR [\fBsourcefile\fR]\&...
.sp 1
\fBunbin\fR [\fBsourcefile\fR]\&...
.sp 1
\fBunhex\fR [\fBsourcefile\fR]\&...
.sp 1
\fBunsingle\fR [\fBsourcefile\fR]\&...
.sp 1
\fBhqx2bin\fR [\fBsourcefile\fR]\&...
.sp 1
\fBsingle2bin\fR [\fBsourcefile\fR]\&...
.sp 1
\fBmacbinary\fR [\fBsourcefile\fR]\&...
.SH DESCRIPTION
megatron is used to transform files from BinHex,
MacBinary, AppleSingle, or \fBnetatalk\fR style
AppleDouble formats into MacBinary or \fInetatalk\fR
style AppleDouble formats. The \fInetatalk\fR
style AppleDouble format is the file format used by \fIafpd,\fR
the \fInetatalk\fR Apple Filing Protocol
(AppleShare) server. BinHex, MacBinary, and AppleSingle are commonly used
formats for transferring Macintosh files between machines via email or
file transfer protocols. megatron uses its name to
determine what type of tranformation is being asked of it.
.PP
If megatron is called as unhex
, unbin or unsingle, it tries to
convert file(s) from BinHex, MacBinary, or AppleSingle into AppleDouble
format. BinHex is the format most often used to send Macintosh files by
e\-mail. Usually these files have an extension of ".hqx". MacBinary
is the format most often used by terminal emulators "on the fly"
when transferring Macintosh files in binary mode. MacBinary files often
have an extension of ".bin". Some Macintosh LAN\-based email
packages use uuencoded AppleSingle format to "attach" or
"enclose" files in email. AppleSingle files don't have a
standard filename extension.
.PP
If megatron is called as hqx2bin,
single2bin, or macbinary, it will
try to convert the file(s) from BinHex, AppleSingle, or AppleDouble into
MacBinary. This last translation may be useful in moving Macintosh files
from your afpd server to some other machine when you
can't copy them from the server using a Macintosh for some reason.
.PP
If megatron is called with any other name, it
uses the default translation, namely unhex.
.PP
If no source file is given, or if \fIsourcefile\fR
is `\fB\-\fR', and if the
conversion is from a BinHex or MacBinary file, megatron
will read from standard input.
.PP
The filename used to store any output file is the filename that is
encoded in the source file. MacBinary files are created with a
".bin" extension. In the case of conflicts, the old file is
overwritten!
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBafpd\fR(8)

