.TH PAP 1 "6 May 2002" "netatalk 1.5"
.SH NAME
pap, papstatus \- client interface to remote printers using Printer Access Protocol
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pap
[
.B -A
.I address
] [
.B -c
] [
.B -d
] [
.B -e
] [
.B -E
] [
.B -p
.I nbpname
] [
.B -s
.I statusfile
] [
.B -w
] [
.B -W
] [
.I FILES
]
.sp
.B papstatus
[
.B -p
.I nbpname
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pap
is used to connect and send files to an AppleTalk connected printer using
the Apple Printer Access Protocol (PAP).
When
.B pap
starts execution, it
tries to open a session with the printer using PAP, and
then downloads the
.I files
to the printer.
.LP
If no
.I files
are given on the command line,
.B pap
begins reading from standard input.
.LP
If no printer is specified on the command line,
.B pap
looks for a file called
.B .paprc
in the current working directory and reads it to obtain the
.I nbpname
of a
printer.
Blank lines and lines that begin with a
.RB ` # '
are ignored.
.I type
and
.I zone
default to
.B LaserWriter
and the zone of the local host, respectively.
.LP
Note that
.B pap
is designed to be useful as a communication filter for sending
.BR lpd (8)
spooled print jobs to AppleTalk connected printers.  See
.BR psf (8)
for hints on how to use it this way.
.SH OPTIONS
.HP
.B -A
.I address
.br
Connect to the printer with Appletalk address
.I address
and do not consult the
.B .paprc
file to find a printer name.  See
.BR atalk_aton (3)
for the syntax of
.IR address .
.TP
.B -c
Take cuts.  The PAP protocol specified a simple queuing
procedure, such that the clients tell the printer how long
they have been waiting to print.  This option causes
.B pap
to lie about how long it has been waiting.
.TP
.B -d
Enable debug output.
.TP
.B -e
Send any message from the printer to stderr instead of stdout.
.BR psf (8)
invokes
.B pap
with this option.
.TP
.B -E
Don't wait for EOF from the printer.  This option is useful
for printers which don't implement PAP correctly.  In a correct
implementation, the client side should wait for the printer to
return EOF before closing the connection.  Some clients don't
wait, and hence some printers have related bugs in their
implementation.
.HP
.B -p
.I nbpname
.br
Connect to the printer named
.I nbpname
and do not consult the
.B .paprc
file to find a printer name.  See
.BR nbp_name (3)
for the syntax of
.IR nbpname .
.HP
.B -s
.I statusfile
.br
Update the file called
.I statusfile
to contain the most recent status message from the printer.
.B pap
gets the status from the printer when it is waiting for the printer to
process input.  The
.I statusfile
will contain a single line terminated with a newline.  This is useful
when
.B pap
is invoked by
.BR psf (8)
within
.BR lpd 's
spool directory.
.TP
.B -w
Wait for the printer status to contain the word "waiting" before
sending the job.  This is to defeat printer-side spool available
on HP IV and V printers.
.TP
.B -W
Wait for the printer status to contain the word "idle" before
sending the job.  This is to defeat printer-side spool available
on HP IV and V printers.
.SH FILES
.TP 20
.B .paprc
file read to obtain printer name if not specified on command line
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nbp_name (3),
.BR atalk_aton (3),
.BR lpd (8),
.BR psf (8).
